README.md, before:

Todo: Add aws section
Todo: Add section for testing locally
Todo: Add table of contents

# FitnessProject

# Adding a New SQL Route to the Backend API

Our backend API is designed with a structured layered architecture to streamline data handling and facilitate testing. This guide will explain the process of adding a new SQL route to our backend API.

## Step 1: Create or Use an Existing Data Type Folder

The main API is found in the `APILambda` folder. This folder contains different subfolders for each type of data (e.g., `users`, `events`). If you're introducing a new data type that does not yet have a corresponding folder, create a new one. 

```plaintext
.
└── APILambda
    ├── users
    ├── events
    └── <new_data_type_folder>
```

## Statements

In order to operate on the database you'll need to write SQL statements.

Navigate to your specific data type folder, and locate the `SQLStatements.ts` file. 

```plaintext
APILambda
└── <your_data_type_folder> (e.g., users, products, etc.)
    ├── routes.ts
    ├── transactions.ts
    └── SQL.ts (This is where you add your SQL statements)
```

In this file, write your SQL statements for the new route. This SQL statement should return the desired query result for your route.

For example, if you're adding a new "products" route, you might add a SQL statement like the following in the `SQLStatements.ts` file under the `products` folder:

```typescript
// SQLStatements.ts in 'products' folder
export const getNewProduct = `SELECT * FROM products WHERE id = $1`;
```

## Transactions

Transactions ensure the integrity of the database by treating a set of SQL operations as a single unit. The transactions will use the SQL statements to perform atomic operationss on the database and return a "success" or "error" result to the route.

Your transaction function will be placed in the `transactions.ts` file within your specific data type folder. The transaction should return a "success" status and the query result upon successful execution. If there's an error during the transaction, it should return an "error" status and a descriptive error message.

```plaintext
APILambda
└── <your_data_type_folder> (e.g., users, products, etc.)
    ├── routes.ts
    ├── transactions.ts (This is where you add your transactions)
    └── SQL.ts
```

For example, if you're working on the "products" route, and you have a SQL statement to retrieve a product by ID, your transaction in the transactions.ts file might look like this:

```typescript
// transactions.ts in 'products' folder
import { getNewProduct } from './SQLStatements.ts';
import { db } from '<path_to_db_connection>';

export async function getNewProductTransaction(id) {
  try {
    const result = await db.query(getNewProduct, [id]);
    return { status: "success", data: result.rows[0] };
  } catch (error) {
    return { status: "error", message: error.message };
  }
}
```

This transaction uses the getNewProduct SQL statement to retrieve data from the database, and handles any potential errors to maintain the stability of the backend API.

## Routes

Routes determine the way your API responds to the client at specific URI endpoints. Routes are composed of transactions and will consume the "success" or "error" results from transactions and convert them into proper HTTP status codes for the client.

This new route will be defined in the `routes.ts` file inside your data type folder. This route should return an HTTP status code signifying success and the query result for successful transactions. If the transaction results in an error, the route should return an "error" status code and an error message.

```plaintext
APILambda
└── <your_data_type_folder> (e.g., users, products, etc.)
    ├── routes.ts (This is where you define your route)
    ├── transactions.ts
    └── SQL.ts
```

For example, if you're adding a "products" route to get a product by its ID, your route in the routes.ts file might look like this:

```typescript
// routes.ts in 'products' folder
import express from 'express';
import { getNewProductTransaction } from './transactions.ts';

const router = express.Router();

router.get("/new-product/:id", async (req, res) => {
  const { id } = req.params;
  const result = await getNewProductTransaction(id);
  
  if (result.status === "success") {
    return res.status(200).json(result.data);
  } else {
    return res.status(500).json({ error: result.message });
  }
});

export default router;
```

This route listens to GET requests at the /new-product/:id endpoint, calls the getNewProductTransaction function, and returns the appropriate HTTP status code and data based on the transaction's result.

## Tests

Tests are cruitcal to ensure the integrity and stability of your SQL route. Tests should be written for every new route or modification to an existing route. Tests are located in the 'tests' folder at the root of the project. Your tests should cover both successful transactions and potential error conditions.

The directory structure for your tests would be:

```plaintext
APILambda
├── <your_data_type_folder> (e.g., users, products, etc.)
└── tests
    └── <your_data_type>.test.ts (This is where you write your tests)
```

For example, if you're testing the "products" route you've added, the tests could be written in a file named products.test.ts in the 'tests' folder. The file might contain tests similar to the following:

```typescript
// products.test.ts in 'tests' folder
import request from 'supertest';
import app from '<path_to_your_express_app>';

describe("GET /new-product/:id", () => {
  it("returns data for a valid id", async () => {
    const id = 1; // assuming 1 is a valid ID
    const res = await request(app).get(`/new-product/${id}`);

    expect(res.statusCode).toEqual(200);
    expect(res.body).toHaveProperty("id");
    expect(res.body.id).toEqual(id);
    // ...other expectations...
  });

  it("returns an error for an invalid id", async () => {
    const id = 9999; // assuming 9999 is an invalid ID
    const res = await request(app).get(`/new-product/${id}`);

    expect(res.statusCode).toEqual(500);
    // ...other expectations...
  });
});
```

These tests make HTTP requests to the new "products" route and assert that the response is as expected. The first test is for a successful transaction with a valid ID, while the second test is for an error scenario where an invalid ID is provided.

# Additional Notes

HTTP Request/Response <-> Express Server <-> Planetscale (SQL)

![image-1 drawio](https://github.com/tifapp/FitnessProjectBackend/assets/70039847/8ce31b28-3c75-466d-9fe5-ea274d118336)

- GeocodingLambda <-> APILambda

- Purpose of Geocoding Lambda: Transform the location into an address

- Within the APILambda consists of different folders that have the different data types: users and events. These are the data types the lambda will work with.

- For each data type, there will be multiple ts files

- routes.ts file takes in a HTTP request and returns an HTTP response

Routes.ts ->

- Returns http status codes and responses

- The req includes the query params and json body

- All of the routes in the user folder will be prepended with the /user path when the mobile path visits the API. 

- To activate the endpoint, the app will visit the domain then /user/friend/userId. (Visiting the API)

- Ideally the transactions will be in a seperate file. Not directly defined inside the routes. Reason: Transactions will call multiple SQL statements. 

- Important: If we call multiple SQL statements within a transaction, it ensures that the operation is atomic. 

- If we start a transaction, it will lock the database. 

- Best practice: We will include a transaction for all of our routes. 

- The transaction should return the success or error message
- Then the router will consume the success or error message, then map it to a status code and return that response

- Inside the transaction, we have a SQL statement that will be coming from a different file. 

- The lowest level is the database level where we are working with individual SQL statements that are contained in a seperate file. 

- The level above is the transactions that will return a success or error message

The top level is the route that calls the transaction. It will transform the generic error to an HTTP success or error.

Important: The reason we have the middle layer that returns a generic success or error message is because we might reuse the transaction in different routes.

Ably Client -> mobile app

- Ably client communicates with the server

- The server will validate the request and pass a token request to the mobile app. The mobile app will use that token request to communicate with Ably and connect to the channels. 

- Endpoint for the individual channel
-> Reason the user can open the channel through event details or notification
-> It will return the token for the channel and any info needed to connect to the chatroom
-> It will be tied to events
-> Setup infrastructure to handle image ids and images

Commit message:

Update README by removing any out of date information and replace it with new information
- The old readme had information about the routes, transactions, and sql being in separate files. We now have changed the model to have each endpoint have its own file and test file.

README.md, after:

Todo: Add aws section
Todo: Add section for testing locally
Todo: Add table of contents

# FitnessProject

# Adding a New SQL Route to the Backend API

Our backend API is designed with a structured layered architecture to streamline data handling and facilitate testing. This guide will explain the process of adding a new SQL route to our backend API.

## Step 1: Create or Use an Existing Data Type Folder

The main API is found in the `APILambda` folder. This folder contains different subfolders for each type of data (e.g., `users`, `events`). If you're introducing a new data type that does not yet have a corresponding folder, create a new one. 

```plaintext
.
└── APILambda
    ├── users
    ├── events
    └── <new_data_type_folder>
```

## Statements

In order to operate on the database you'll need to write SQL statements.

Navigate to your specific data type folder, and locate the `SQLStatements.ts` file. 

```plaintext
APILambda
└── <your_data_type_folder> (e.g., users, products, etc.)
    ├── routes.ts
    ├── transactions.ts
    └── SQL.ts (This is where you add your SQL statements)
```

In this file, write your SQL statements for the new route. This SQL statement should return the desired query result for your route.

For example, if you're adding a new "products" route, you might add a SQL statement like the following in the `SQLStatements.ts` file under the `products` folder:

```typescript
// SQLStatements.ts in 'products' folder
export const getNewProduct = `SELECT * FROM products WHERE id = $1`;
```

## Transactions

Transactions ensure the integrity of the database by treating a set of SQL operations as a single unit. The transactions will use the SQL statements to perform atomic operationss on the database and return a "success" or "error" result to the route.

Your transaction function will be placed in the `transactions.ts` file within your specific data type folder. The transaction should return a "success" status and the query result upon successful execution. If there's an error during the transaction, it should return an "error" status and a descriptive error message.

```plaintext
APILambda
└── <your_data_type_folder> (e.g., users, products, etc.)
    ├── routes.ts
    ├── transactions.ts (This is where you add your transactions)
    └── SQL.ts
```

For example, if you're working on the "products" route, and you have a SQL statement to retrieve a product by ID, your transaction in the transactions.ts file might look like this:

```typescript
// transactions.ts in 'products' folder
import { getNewProduct } from './SQLStatements.ts';
import { db } from '<path_to_db_connection>';

export async function getNewProductTransaction(id) {
  try {
    const result = await db.query(getNewProduct, [id]);
    return { status: "success", data: result.rows[0] };
  } catch (error) {
    return { status: "error", message: error.message };
  }
}
```

This transaction uses the getNewProduct SQL statement to retrieve data from the database, and handles any potential errors to maintain the stability of the backend API.

## Routes

Routes determine the way your API responds to the client at specific URI endpoints. Routes are composed of transactions and will consume the "success" or "error" results from transactions and convert them into proper HTTP status codes for the client.

This new route will be defined in the `routes.ts` file inside your data type folder. This route should return an HTTP status code signifying success and the query result for successful transactions. If the transaction results in an error, the route should return an "error" status code and an error message.

```plaintext
APILambda
└── <your_data_type_folder> (e.g., users, products, etc.)
    ├── routes.ts (This is where you define your route)
    ├── transactions.ts
    └── SQL.ts
```

For example, if you're adding a "products" route to get a product by its ID, your route in the routes.ts file might look like this:

```typescript
// routes.ts in 'products' folder
import express from 'express';
import { getNewProductTransaction } from './transactions.ts';

const router = express.Router();

router.get("/new-product/:id", async (req, res) => {
  const { id } = req.params;
  const result = await getNewProductTransaction(id);
  
  if (result.status === "success") {
    return res.status(200).json(result.data);
  } else {
    return res.status(500).json({ error: result.message });
  }
});

export default router;
```

This route listens to GET requests at the /new-product/:id endpoint, calls the getNewProductTransaction function, and returns the appropriate HTTP status code and data based on the transaction's result.

## Tests

Tests are cruitcal to ensure the integrity and stability of your SQL route. Tests should be written for every new route or modification to an existing route. Tests are located in the 'tests' folder at the root of the project. Your tests should cover both successful transactions and potential error conditions.

The directory structure for your tests would be:

```plaintext
APILambda
├── <your_data_type_folder> (e.g., users, products, etc.)
└── tests
    └── <your_data_type>.test.ts (This is where you write your tests)
```

For example, if you're testing the "products" route you've added, the tests could be written in a file named products.test.ts in the 'tests' folder. The file might contain tests similar to the following:

```typescript
// products.test.ts in 'tests' folder
import request from 'supertest';
import app from '<path_to_your_express_app>';

describe("GET /new-product/:id", () => {
  it("returns data for a valid id", async () => {
    const id = 1; // assuming 1 is a valid ID
    const res = await request(app).get(`/new-product/${id}`);

    expect(res.statusCode).toEqual(200);
    expect(res.body).toHaveProperty("id");
    expect(res.body.id).toEqual(id);
    // ...other expectations...
  });

  it("returns an error for an invalid id", async () => {
    const id = 9999; // assuming 9999 is an invalid ID
    const res = await request(app).get(`/new-product/${id}`);

    expect(res.statusCode).toEqual(500);
    // ...other expectations...
  });
});
```

These tests make HTTP requests to the new "products" route and assert that the response is as expected. The first test is for a successful transaction with a valid ID, while the second test is for an error scenario where an invalid ID is provided.

![image-2 drawio](https://github.com/tifapp/FitnessProjectBackend/assets/70039847/202c1973-4ed2-4887-859e-4b74eeced128)


![image-1 drawio](https://github.com/tifapp/FitnessProjectBackend/assets/70039847/8ce31b28-3c75-466d-9fe5-ea274d118336)

![image3 drawio](https://github.com/tifapp/FitnessProjectBackend/assets/70039847/2366e521-0e75-4e13-ae56-8953c2d30840)

# Geocoding Lambda

- Purpose of Geocoding Lambda: Transform the location into an address

# API Lambda

- Within the APILambda consists of different folders that have the different data types: users and events. These are the data types the lambda will work with.

# Rules for creating an endpoint

- Each endpoint will have its own file that contains the code to take in a HTTP Request and return a HTTP response

- Each endpoint will have its own test file

- When needed create a a helper method inside the /test/helpers. The purpose of these endpoints is to artifically call the endpoint passing in our data in the request body.

- The req includes the query params and json body

- All of the routes in the user folder will be prepended with the /user path when the mobile path visits the API.

- To activate the endpoint, the app will visit the domain then /user/friend/userId. (Visiting the API)

- Important: If we call multiple SQL statements within a transaction, it ensures that the operation is atomic. 

- If we start a transaction, it will lock the database. 

Ably Client -> mobile app

- Ably client communicates with the server

- The server will validate the request and pass a token request to the mobile app. The mobile app will use that token request to communicate with Ably and connect to the channels. 

- Endpoint for the individual channel
-> Reason the user can open the channel through event details or notification
-> It will return the token for the channel and any info needed to connect to the chatroom
-> It will be tied to events
-> Setup infrastructure to handle image ids and images
